Define more annotations as declarations (#3448)
modelica/ModelicaSpecification: chapters/annotations.tex

(For replaceable class declarations with a \lstinline[language=grammar]!constraining-clause! also refer to \cref{constraining-clause-annotations}.)
The specification in this document defines the semantic meaning if a tool implements any of these annotations.

> \section{How to Interpret Annotation Definitions}\label{how-to-interpret-annotation-definitions}

Reviewer: It can be made clearer that this is a section on notation:
```suggestion
\section{Notation for Annotation Definitions}\label{how-to-interpret-annotation-definitions}

```

Reviewer 2: "Notation for Annotation" It is a bit of a mouthful but I have no better suggestion.

> If the annotation itself is described by a \lstinline!record! \emph{class} the annotation can be seen as a modifier for a \lstinline!record! \emph{component} with the same name.

Reviewer: We have to main forms:
```suggestion
Annotations are defined using the syntactic forms of Modelica component declarations and record definitions, with the following special semantics.
If the annotation is described by a component declaration, the annotation is used in the form of a value modifier for the same name.
If the annotation is described by a \lstinline!record! \emph{class} the annotation is used in the form of a modifier for a \lstinline!record! \emph{component} with the same name.

```

> A default value for a record member will be used if there is no modifier for that record member.

Reviewer: Also describe meaning of absent default value:
```suggestion
A declaration equation for a component declaration or record member declaration specifies a default to be used when no corresponding annotation is given.
Default behavior can also be specified in the text as an alternative to a declaration equation.
Component declaration annotations always have default behavior, as all annotations are optional.
When there is no declaration equation and no other explanation of default behavior in the text for a record member, an annotation modifier for the record must contain a modifier for that member.

```

Author: As indicated I'm not happy with the last element, but will discuss that separately.

> If the annotation is declared as an \lstinline!/*evaluable*/ parameter! the corresponding modifier must be an evaluable parameter.

Reviewer: I don't think we should require it to be a parameter, right?
```suggestion
If the annotation is declared as an \lstinline!/*evaluable*/ parameter! the corresponding modifier must be evaluable.
```

Reviewer: However, first we should explain the general idea of specifying variability:
```suggestion
When an annotation is defined with a component variability prefix (\cref{component-variability-prefixes-discrete-parameter-constant}), this restricts the allowed variability of corresponding annotation modifiers analogously to the rules in \cref{variability-of-expressions}.
If the annotation is declared as an \lstinline!/*evaluable*/ parameter! the corresponding modifier is further restricted to be evaluable.
```

Reviewer 2: So far there is just one instance of parameter and it is evaluable. Has there been an agreement on which annotations are allowed to be parameters and not evaluable? Given that the annotations are not supposed to store extra information, I would be very suspicious of any annotation that uses a parameter but that parameter can only solved in initial equations. I only know of DynamicSelect that has simulation time dependency. But then it allows variables, so even there the case of non-evaluable parameter is not applicable. All of this is to say, do we really need the case for parameters that are not evaluable?

Reviewer: I think the plan is to start with a conservative interpretation of the current state, and then have later discussions in other PRs about what variability restrictions we can lift.

I think the case for parameters that are not evaluable is at least good for completeness, and even if we didn't have that case I would still have preferred to say `/*evaluable*/ parameter` for the evaluable ones in order to make clear that there's a difference compared to the usual meaning of declaring something as just `parameter` (for which there is not requirement of being evaluable).

Reviewer: Actually, there's at least one good candidate for pure `parameter` variability, namely `experiment.StopTime`.  The `StartTime` is more complicated due to its relation to `time` during initialization, but it wouldn't be impossible to handle in the form of a semantic constraint.

Author: However, even if possible it does not seem urgent as we can already handle such models as follows:
```
  parameter Real myStopTime=...;
equation
  when time>=myStopTime then
    terminate("Planned end");
  end when;
```

Reviewer: I didn't say it was urgent. Anyway, using `terminate` isn't quite the same as setting `StopTime`, as it requires specifying some insanely big `StopTime` that is guaranteed to exceed `myStopTime`.  However, doing so might have adverse impact on initial guesses for solver step size, so it would be better to directly control `StopTime` using the parameter.

> If the annotation is declared as a parameter the corresponding modifier must be an evaluable parameter.
> If the annotation is declared as a constant the corresponding modifier must be a literal value.

Reviewer: In my opinion there is already too much confusion about constant vs literal.  I'm afraid that this would set the confusion in stone.
My suggestion, I believe would be a good topic for a phone meeting discussion, is the following:
```suggestion
If the annotation is declared as \lstinline!parameter! the corresponding modifier must be an evaluable parameter.
If the annotation is declared as \lstinline!$\mathit{literal}$ constant! the corresponding modifier must be a literal value.
```

For a constructive discussion, here are some alternatives I'd like to discuss for literal values, including the current current state of the PR:
- `constant String info …;` (current state of PR)
- _literal_ `constant String info …;` (suggestion above)
- `/*literal*/ constant String info …;`
- _literal_ ` String info …;`

Author: Please consider these suggestions so that we can have a vote and move forward:

> * `constant String info …;` (current state of PR)
> * _literal_ `constant String info …;` (suggestion above)
> * `/*literal*/ constant String info …;`
> * _literal_ ` String info …;`

I assume the intent is that  *evaluable* should replace *literal* for parameters.

Author: > Please consider these suggestions so that we can have a vote and move forward:
> 
> > * `constant String info …;` (current state of PR)
> > * _literal_ `constant String info …;` (suggestion above)
> > * `/*literal*/ constant String info …;`

Language group:

Poll:
1. Elena, Gerd, Stephan
2. Henrik
3. Henrik, Elena, Gerd, Stephan
Abstain: Quentin, Daeoh, Markus

Conclusion: 3.

Reviewer: This has now been implemented.  Resolving.

> If the annotation is declared as a \lstinline!/*literal*/ constant! the corresponding modifier must be a literal value.

Reviewer: To go with the change above:
```suggestion
If the annotation is declared as a \lstinline!/*literal*/ constant! the corresponding modifier is further restricted to be a literal value.
```

(For replaceable class declarations with a \lstinline[language=grammar]!constraining-clause! also refer to \cref{constraining-clause-annotations}.)
The specification in this document defines the semantic meaning if a tool implements any of these annotations.

\section{Notation for Annotation Definitions}\label{notation-for-annotation-definitions}

Annotations are defined using the syntactic forms of Modelica component declarations and record definitions, with the following special semantics.
If the annotation is described by a component declaration, the annotation is used in the form of a value modifier for the same name.
If the annotation is described by a \lstinline!record! \emph{class} the annotation is used in the form of a modifier for a \lstinline!record! \emph{component} with the same name.

> A declaration equation for a component or record member specifies a default to be used when no corresponding annotation is given.

Reviewer: I would like to try resolving the whole conflict according to the second alternative in https://github.com/modelica/ModelicaSpecification/pull/3496#pullrequestreview-1975646890:
```suggestion
A declaration equation for a component or record member specifies a default to be used when no corresponding annotation is given.
An array record member without declaration equation and with size specified by colon (\lstinline!:!) defaults to being empty.
```

If this is an acceptable solution, we should then use this where applicable as part of this PR.

Author: Ok then to get this past review.

Author: So @henrikt-ma any remaining issues?

Reviewer: Not that I can see.  Sorry about the long delay.  Resolving.

Default behavior can also be specified in the text as an alternative to a declaration equation.
Component declaration annotations always have default behavior, as all annotations are optional.
When there is no declaration equation and no other explanation of default behavior in the text for a record member, an annotation modifier for the record must contain a modifier for that member.

When an annotation is defined with a component variability prefix (\cref{component-variability-prefixes-discrete-parameter-constant}), this restricts the allowed variability of corresponding annotation modifiers analogously to the rules in \cref{variability-of-expressions}.
If the annotation is declared as an \lstinline!/*evaluable*/ parameter! the corresponding modifier is further restricted to be evaluable.
If the annotation is declared as a \lstinline!/*literal*/ constant! the corresponding modifier is further restricted to be a literal value.

> 

Reviewer: Until we have a viable alternative to `{}` we should define what it means so that we can use it without not conforming to our own notation.  Disallowing this as part of this PR would be a major scope creep in my opinion.

The day we find an alternative, there will be no backwards compatibility issue of changing the notation, as it is only used within the specification itself.
```suggestion
For an array record member, the special expression \lstinline!{}! in a declaration equation indicates that the array is empty by default.
```

Author: I have broken that out into another PR.

Reviewer: I'm resolving this in order to start over with a new suggestion originating from that PR.

(For replaceable class declarations with a \lstinline[language=grammar]!constraining-clause! also refer to \cref{constraining-clause-annotations}.)
The specification in this document defines the semantic meaning if a tool implements any of these annotations.

> \section{Notation for Annotation Definitions}\label{how-to-interpret-annotation-definitions}

Author: Yes, done. 

And for line 21 it seems it was added by mistake as part of some other good descriptions; I still dislike this idea of scope-creep for every PR.

Annotations are defined using the syntactic forms of Modelica component declarations and record definitions, with the following special semantics.
If the annotation is described by a component declaration, the annotation is used in the form of a value modifier for the same name.
If the annotation is described by a \lstinline!record! \emph{class} the annotation is used in the form of a modifier for a \lstinline!record! \emph{component} with the same name.

A declaration equation for a component or record member specifies a default to be used when no corresponding annotation is given.
An array record member without declaration equation and with size specified by colon (\lstinline!:!) defaults to being empty.
Default behavior can also be specified in the text as an alternative to a declaration equation.

> Component declaration annotations always have default behavior, as all annotations are optional.

Reviewer: I didn't check all such annotations, but I found at least two that didn't follow this rule.  Is it the rule that should be rewritten, or should we fix all component declaration annotations to make sure they specify their default?

Author: I will rewrite it.

Author: Have done

> For an array record member, the special expression \lstinline!{}! in a declaration equation indicates that the array is empty by default.

Author: ```suggestion
```

(For replaceable class declarations with a \lstinline[language=grammar]!constraining-clause! also refer to \cref{constraining-clause-annotations}.)
The specification in this document defines the semantic meaning if a tool implements any of these annotations.

\section{Notation for Annotation Definitions}\label{notation-for-annotation-definitions}

Annotations are defined using the syntactic forms of Modelica component declarations and record definitions, with the following special semantics.
If the annotation is described by a component declaration, the annotation is used in the form of a value modifier for the same name.
If the annotation is described by a \lstinline!record! \emph{class} the annotation is used in the form of a modifier for a \lstinline!record! \emph{component} with the same name.

A declaration equation for a component or record member specifies a default to be used when no corresponding annotation is given.
An array record member without declaration equation and with size specified by colon (\lstinline!:!) defaults to being empty.

> Default behavior can also be specified in the text as an alternative to a declaration equation.

Reviewer: Line break to make rules for component declaration annotations its own paragraph:
```suggestion
Default behavior can also be specified in the text as an alternative to a declaration equation.

```

Component declaration annotations always have default behavior, as all annotations are optional.

> When the default behavior corresponds to a specific value for annotation that is given as a default.

Reviewer: More clear:
```suggestion
When the default behavior corresponds to a specific value for the annotation, it will be expressed using a declaration equation.
```

> When the default value is missing the default behavior is generally explained in more detail.

Reviewer: I suppose this is what is meant?
```suggestion
Otherwise, the default behavior will be described in the text.
```

> When there is no declaration equation and no other explanation of default behavior in the text for a record member, an annotation modifier for the record must contain a modifier for that member.

Author: Done.

(For replaceable class declarations with a \lstinline[language=grammar]!constraining-clause! also refer to \cref{constraining-clause-annotations}.)
The specification in this document defines the semantic meaning if a tool implements any of these annotations.

\section{Notation for Annotation Definitions}\label{notation-for-annotation-definitions}

Annotations are defined using the syntactic forms of Modelica component declarations and record definitions, with the following special semantics.
If the annotation is described by a component declaration, the annotation is used in the form of a value modifier for the same name.

> If the annotation is described by a \lstinline!record! \emph{class} the annotation is used in the form of a modifier for a \lstinline!record! \emph{component} with the same name.

Reviewer: Now that we are handling annotation as some sort of modifiers, I think we need to clarify this difference:
```
annotation(Dialog(loadSelector)); /* No effect at all */
annotation(Dialog(loadSelector = Selector())); /* In effect, using defaults for Selector. */
```

A declaration equation for a component or record member specifies a default to be used when no corresponding annotation is given.
An array record member without declaration equation and with size specified by colon (\lstinline!:!) defaults to being empty.

> Default behavior can also be specified in the text as an alternative to a declaration equation, or implicitly by saying "if specified".

Reviewer: Formatting:
```suggestion
Default behavior can also be specified in the text as an alternative to a declaration equation, or implicitly by saying \emph{if specified}.
```

> If the description states the annotation only has an effect for specific values it implies that the default is a value that has no effect.

Reviewer: Missing word:
```suggestion
If the description states that the annotation only has an effect for specific values it implies that the default is a value that has no effect.
```

Reviewer: Further, is it really necessary to require that the default corresponds to any value at all?
```suggestion
If the description states that the annotation only has effect one or more specific values, the default behavior (none of these effects) does not necessarily correspond to any value.
```

Author: > Further, is it really necessary to require that the default corresponds to any value at all?

Perhaps not necessary - but clear as it is currently it is only used for Booleans, so the default corresponds to the other one.

When there is no declaration equation and no other explanation of default behavior in the text for a record member, an annotation modifier for the record must contain a modifier for that member.

Component declaration annotations always have default behavior, as all annotations are optional.

> When the default behavior corresponds to a specific value for the annotation, it will be expressed using a declaration equation.

Reviewer: This is what was agreed to remove, right?
```suggestion
```

> Otherwise, the default behavior will be described in the text.

Reviewer: This is already covered by the _specific values_ sentence above, right?
```suggestion
```

The \fmtannotationindex{Documentation} annotation has the following contents, where the \lstinline!info! and \lstinline!revisions! annotations are described in \cref{annotation-info-revisions}, and the \lstinline!figures! annotation is described in \cref{annotations-for-figures}:
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
record Documentation
  constant String info = "" "Description of the class";
  constant String revisions = "" "Revision history";
  Figure[:] figures = {}; "Simulation result figures";
end Documentation;
\end{lstlisting}

How the tool interprets the information in \lstinline!Documentation! is unspecified.

> \subsection{How to interpret annotation definitions}

Reviewer: Title case:
```suggestion
\subsection{How to Interpret Annotation Definitions}
```

Reviewer: Also, use title which connects better with the notation section in the introduction:
```suggestion
\subsection{Record Notation for Annotation Definitions}\label{annotation-record-notation}
```

… and add a link to this section from the notation section in the introduction.

> If the annotation itself is described by a \lstinline!record! \emph{class} the annotation can be seen as a modifier for a \lstinline!record! \emph{component} with the same name.

Reviewer: (Attaching comment to one of the available lines in the section.)

I think that this subsection should go as the first `\section` of the chapter.

Reviewer: Looks good now.  Resolving.

> If the annotation is declared as a parameter the corresponding modifier must be an evaluable parameter.

Reviewer: To avoid confusion, couldn't we write something more than just `parameter` when it is evaluable parameter we mean?  For instance:
```suggestion
If the annotation is declared as a parameter the corresponding modifier must be a parameter, or an evaluable parameter in case the \lstinline!parameter! keyword is prefixed with $\mathit{evaluable}$, as in \lstinline!$\mathit{evaluable}$ parameter Boolean HideResult!.
```

Reviewer 2: But we are trying to use the definitions as they exist in language now, and _evaluable_ is not an official keyword. I prefer Hans's formulation. Same for constants below.

Author: I also prefer to stick with what is available now, even if slightly inaccurate.

Reviewer: This has now been addressed.  Resolving.

> If the annotation is declared as a constant the corresponding modifier must be a literal value.

Reviewer: Again, it would be good to avoid writing just `constant` when we mean something different than constant variability.  For instance:
```suggestion
If the annotation is declared as \lstinline!constant! the corresponding modifier must be a constant expression, or a literal value in case the \lstinline!constant! keword is prefixed with $\mathit{literal}$, as in \lstinline!$\mathit{literal}$ constant Boolean singleInstance!.
```

Reviewer: Looks good now.  Resolving.

> 

Reviewer: In order to work as a fix for #3450, I think that this section also needs to explain the semantics of declared default values in the record notation.  Maybe this can be explained more generally so that it doesn't only apply to record-style definitions?

Reviewer 2: I also think it would be nice to add the description of default values because I had to explain it to someone just a couple of months ago.

Author: I tried to add something for that.

Reviewer 2: From my side, this can be resolved. Leaving open, so @henrikt-ma can still add his comments.

Reviewer: Obsolete conversation.  Resolving.

\end{center}

\begin{annotationdefinition}[Evaluate]
\begin{synopsis}\begin{lstlisting}

> /*literal*/ constant Boolean Evaluate;

Reviewer: It is difficult to express the default for this with `Ternary`.

Author: As a value, yes. But I added the text that the tools decide in that case - which correspond to the current default behavior.

For a parameter, \lstinline!Evaluate = false! ensures that the parameter is a non-evaluable parameter according to \cref{component-variability} (meaning it is not allowed to be used where an evaluable expression (\cref{evaluable-expressions}) is expected).
For both parameters and constants -- even when the value can be determined during translation -- the model developer further proposes to not utilize the value for symbolic processing.

If the annotation is missing for a parameter or constant the evaluation of the component is tool-dependent.

> 

Reviewer: Isn't this implicit in the general rules for component-annotations defined as effects for specific values?

Author: I wouldn't say that it is clear that it is implicitly tool-dependent.

For state machines it is useful to have single instances of local classes.
This can be done using:
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
constant Boolean singleInstance;
\end{lstlisting}

The annotation \fmtannotationindex{singleInstance} if \lstinline!true! in a class indicates that there should only be one component instance of the class, and it should be in the same scope as the class is defined.
The intent is to remove the class when the component is removed and to prevent duplication of the component.
If \lstinline!false! it has no impact.

\subsection{Connection Restrictions}\label{connection-restrictions}

A connector component declaration may have the following annotation:

> \begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica, mathescape=true]

Reviewer: Rely on `mathescape` default:
```suggestion
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
```

For state machines it is useful to have single instances of local classes.
This can be done using:
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
/*literal*/ constant Boolean singleInstance;
\end{lstlisting}

The annotation \fmtannotationindex{singleInstance} if \lstinline!true! in a class indicates that there should only be one component instance of the class, and it should be in the same scope as the class is defined.
The intent is to remove the class when the component is removed and to prevent duplication of the component.
If \lstinline!false! it has no impact.

\subsection{Connection Restrictions}\label{connection-restrictions}

A connector component declaration may have the following annotation:
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]

> /*literal*/ constant String mustBeConnected = "$\mathit{message}$";

Reviewer: Shouldn't we align this with `singleInstance`, so that we only use declaration equations for specifying defaults?

Author: Good catch.

Author: Has been corrected.

\end{annotationdefinition}

\begin{annotationdefinition}[TestCase]
\begin{synopsis}\begin{lstlisting}
record TestCase

>   /*literal*/ constant Boolean shouldPass;

Reviewer: Wasn't the idea to make the defaults for all component style annotations explicit?
```suggestion
  /*literal*/ constant Boolean shouldPass = true;
```

Author: That sort of suggest that `TestCase.shouldPass=true` is the default, and that isn't the case as a test-case shouldn't be used in normal models (even if it has shouldPass=true).

Author: I have thus clarified it further.

\end{annotationdefinition}

\begin{annotationdefinition}[TestCase]
\begin{synopsis}\begin{lstlisting}
record TestCase
  /*literal*/ constant Boolean shouldPass;
end TestCase;
\end{lstlisting}\end{synopsis}
\begin{semantics}
If \lstinline!shouldPass! is \lstinline!false! it indicates that the translation or the simulation of the model should fail.
If a tools checks a package where classes have \lstinline!shouldPass = false! they should not generate errors, and checking may even be skipped.
On the other hand, models with \lstinline!shouldPass = false! may be useful for creation of negative tests in tool-specific ways.
Similarly as a class with \lstinline!obsolete! annotation, a class with \lstinline!TestCase! annotation (regardless of the value of \lstinline!shouldPass!) shall not be used in other models, unless those models also have a \lstinline!TestCase! annotation.

> If the \lstinline!TestCase! annotation is missing it is a normal model -- there are thus no restriction on the use of the model, and the model shall not contain errors.

Reviewer: Found one more typo:
```suggestion
If the \lstinline!TestCase! annotation is missing it is a normal model -- there are thus no restrictions on the use of the model, and the model shall not contain errors.
```

\end{annotationdefinition}

\begin{annotationdefinition}[TestCase]
\begin{synopsis}\begin{lstlisting}
record TestCase
  /*literal*/ constant Boolean shouldPass;
end TestCase;
\end{lstlisting}\end{synopsis}
\begin{semantics}
If \lstinline!shouldPass! is \lstinline!false! it indicates that the translation or the simulation of the model should fail.
If a tools checks a package where classes have \lstinline!shouldPass = false! they should not generate errors, and checking may even be skipped.
On the other hand, models with \lstinline!shouldPass = false! may be useful for creation of negative tests in tool-specific ways.
Similarly as a class with \lstinline!obsolete! annotation, a class with \lstinline!TestCase! annotation (regardless of the value of \lstinline!shouldPass!) shall not be used in other models, unless those models also have a \lstinline!TestCase! annotation.

If the \lstinline!TestCase! annotation is missing it is a normal model -- there are thus no restrictions on the use of the model, and the model shall not contain errors.

> 

Reviewer: Wouldn't it be more clear to give this as the semantics of `shouldPass = true`, and then make this the default?

Author: No, as the test-cases are also restricted so that they shouldn't be used in other models (even if they should pass).
That allows the test-cases to be modified without having to care about conversions, and separates out test-cases from other models.

\end{example}

A connector component declaration may have the following annotation:

> \begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica, mathescape=true]

Reviewer: Rely on `mathescape` default:
```suggestion
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
```

\subsection{Single Use of Class}\label{annotation-for-single-use-of-class}\label{single-use-of-class}

For state machines it is useful to have single instances of local classes.
To this end a class may use the annotation:
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
/*literal*/ constant Boolean singleInstance;
\end{lstlisting}%
\annotationindex{singleInstance}

Only has effect when \lstinline!true!, meaning that there should only be one component instance of the class, and it should be in the same scope as the class is defined.
The intent is to remove the class when the component is removed and to prevent duplication of the component.

\subsection{Connection Restrictions}\label{connection-restrictions}

A connector component declaration may have the following annotation:
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
/*literal*/ constant String mustBeConnected;
\end{lstlisting}%
\annotationindex{mustBeConnected}

If specified it makes it an error if the connector does not appear as an inside connector in any connect-equation (for a conditional connector this check is only active if the connector is enabled).

> The string value should provide the reason why it must be connected, and should be non-empty.

Reviewer: Stronger:
```suggestion
The string value must be non-empty and provide the reason why it must be connected.
```

For state machines it is useful to have single instances of local classes.
This can be done using:
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]

> /*literal*/ constant Boolean singleInstance;

Reviewer: Let's make this the new representative of a component declaration style annotation where the default corresponds to a particular value:
```suggestion
/*literal*/ constant Boolean singleInstance = false;
```

For state machines it is useful to have single instances of local classes.

> This can be done using:

Reviewer: Replacement for detail removed below:
```suggestion
To this end a classy may use the annotation:
```

Author: A bit of spelling error there, will add with out it.

\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
/*literal*/ constant Boolean singleInstance = false;

> \end{lstlisting}

Reviewer: Replacement for index entry removed below:
```suggestion
\end{lstlisting}%
\annotationindex{singleInstance}
```

> The annotation \fmtannotationindex{singleInstance}, if \lstinline!true!, in a class indicates that there should only be one component instance of the class, and it should be in the same scope as the class is defined.

Reviewer: More streamlined way of describing default:
```suggestion
Only has effect when \lstinline!true!, meaning that there should only be one component instance of the class, and it should be in the same scope as the class is defined.
```

The intent is to remove the class when the component is removed and to prevent duplication of the component.

> If \lstinline!false!, it has no impact.

Reviewer: I think we need to find more streamlined way of describing defaults.
```suggestion
```

\subsection{Connection Restrictions}\label{connection-restrictions}

A connector component declaration may have the following annotation:
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
/*literal*/ constant String mustBeConnected;
\end{lstlisting}%
\annotationindex{mustBeConnected}

> It makes it an error if the connector does not appear as an inside connector in any connect-equation (for a conditional connector this check is only active if the connector is enabled).

Reviewer: I feel we are ending up with a cumbersome notation if we always need to say that the annotation only has effect when present…
```suggestion
Only has effect when present, and makes it an error if the connector does not appear as an inside connector in any connect-equation (for a conditional connector this check is only active if the connector is enabled).
```

Author: I added a default and rephrased.

A connector component declaration may have the following annotation:
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]

> /*literal*/ constant String mayOnlyConnectOnce;

Reviewer: Default can be expressed with declaration equation:
```suggestion
/*literal*/ constant String mayOnlyConnectOnce = false;
```

Author: It's a string so false would be wrong. But could reformulate.

Author: I added a default and rephrased.

\end{lstlisting}%
\annotationindex{mayOnlyConnectOnce}

> 

Reviewer: On the line below (GitHub won't let me attach suggestion there), the test should start with:
```
Only has effect when \lstinline!true!, making it an error…
```

A connector component declaration may have the following annotation:
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
/*literal*/ constant String mayOnlyConnectOnce ;
\end{lstlisting}%
\annotationindex{mayOnlyConnectOnce}

If specified it makes it an error if the connector is connected as an inside connector in a connect-equation and thus appears in a connection set if:
\begin{itemize}
\item For non-stream connectors the connection set has more than two elements.
\item For stream connectors (see \cref{stream-connectors}), the connection set has more than two elements whose flow variable may be negative (based on evaluation of the \lstinline!min!-attribute).
\end{itemize}
For an array of connectors it applies separately to each element.

> The string value should provide the reason why it may only be connected once, and should be non-empty.

Reviewer: Stronger:
```suggestion
The string value must be non-empty and provide the reason why it may only be connected once.
```

This section describes the annotations that are used to define properties of the graphical user interface.

\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica, mathescape=true]
String preferredView = $\mathit{view}$;
\end{lstlisting}

The \fmtannotationindex{preferredView} annotation defines the default view when selecting the class.
The $\mathit{view}$ is a \lstinline!String! literal where \lstinline!"info"! means class documentation (``information''), \lstinline!"diagram"! means diagram view, \lstinline!"icon"! means icon view, and \lstinline!"text"! means Modelica source code (``text'').

\begin{lstlisting}

> Boolean DocumentationClass = true;

Reviewer 2: Is it allowed to specify ``DocumentationClass = false``? The description assumes that if it was specified it is specified as true. Also giving it a binding equation like that assumes that there is a default value, so it would be sufficient to specify: ``annotation(DocumentationClass)``. Is that indeed allowed?

Author: I believe that a good solution would be to remove that binding and change the text for DocumentationClass to start with: "If true..." and possibly add "if false it has no impact"

Author: Have now added that.

This section describes the annotations that are used to define properties of the graphical user interface.

> \begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica, mathescape=true]

Reviewer: Rely on `mathescape` default:
```suggestion
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
```

constant String preferredView = $\mathit{view}$;
\end{lstlisting}

The \fmtannotationindex{preferredView} annotation defines the default view when selecting the class.
The $\mathit{view}$ is a \lstinline!String! literal where \lstinline!"info"! means class documentation (``information''), \lstinline!"diagram"! means diagram view, \lstinline!"icon"! means icon view, and \lstinline!"text"! means Modelica source code (``text'').

\begin{lstlisting}
constant Boolean DocumentationClass;
\end{lstlisting}%
\annotationindex{DocumentationClass}

Only allowed as class annotation on any kind of class and if set to \lstinline!true! implies that this class and all classes within it are treated as having the annotation \lstinline!preferredView = "info"!.
If the annotation \lstinline!preferredView! is explicitly set for a class, it has precedence over a \lstinline!DocumentationClass! annotation.

\begin{nonnormative}
A tool may display such classes in special ways.  For example, the description texts of the classes might be displayed instead
of the class names, and if no icon is defined, a special information default icon may be displayed in the package browser.
\end{nonnormative}

> \begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica, mathescape=true]

Reviewer: Rely on `mathescape` default:
```suggestion
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
```

constant String defaultComponentName = "$\mathit{name}$";
\end{lstlisting}%
\annotationindex{defaultComponentName}

When creating a component of the given class, the recommended component name is \emph{name}.
If the default name cannot be used (e.g., since it is already in use), another name based on \lstinline!defaultComponentName! shall be derived automatically, except as described under \lstinline!defaultComponentPrefixes!.
When automatically deriving a name, any trailing `\lstinline!1!' in the \lstinline!defaultComponentName! shall be disregarded.

> \begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica, mathescape=true]

Reviewer: Rely on `mathescape` default:
```suggestion
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
```

This section describes the annotations that are used to define properties of the graphical user interface.

\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]

> /*literal*/ constant String preferredView = $\mathit{view}$;

Reviewer: Obsolete use of placeholder variable:
```suggestion
/*literal*/ constant String preferredView;
```
Also the default needs to be described in the test since it isn't given with a declaration equation.

This section describes the annotations that are used to define properties of the graphical user interface.

\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
/*literal*/ constant String preferredView;
\end{lstlisting}

The \fmtannotationindex{preferredView} annotation defines the default view when selecting the class.
The $\mathit{view}$ is a \lstinline!String! literal where \lstinline!"info"! means class documentation (``information''), \lstinline!"diagram"! means diagram view, \lstinline!"icon"! means icon view, and \lstinline!"text"! means Modelica source code (``text'').
If not specified the default view is tool-specific.

\begin{lstlisting}
/*literal*/ constant Boolean DocumentationClass;
\end{lstlisting}%
\annotationindex{DocumentationClass}

> Only allowed as class annotation on any kind of class and, if set to \lstinline!true!, implies that this class and all classes within it are treated as having the annotation \lstinline!preferredView = "info"!.

Reviewer: Reuse formulation _only having effect when `true`_:
```suggestion
Only allowed as class annotation on any kind of class and only having effect when \lstinline!true!, meaning that this class and all classes within it are treated as having the annotation \lstinline!preferredView = "info"!.
```
```suggestion
Only allowed as class annotation on any kind of class and, if set to \lstinline!true!, implies that this class and all classes within it are treated as having the annotation \lstinline!preferredView = "info"!.
```

and the default name cannot be used (e.g., since it is already in use) it is recommended to give a diagnostic.
\end{nonnormative}

> \begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica, mathescape=true]

Reviewer: Rely on `mathescape` default:
```suggestion
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
```

\end{nonnormative}

\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
/*literal*/ constant String defaultComponentName;
\end{lstlisting}%
\annotationindex{defaultComponentName}

When creating a component of the given class, and the annotation is specified it gives the recommended component name.
If the default name cannot be used (e.g., since it is already in use), another name based on \lstinline!defaultComponentName! shall be derived automatically, except as described under \lstinline!defaultComponentPrefixes!.
It is an error if the string is not a valid identifier.
When automatically deriving a name, any trailing `\lstinline!1!' in the \lstinline!defaultComponentName! shall be disregarded.

> if not specified the recommended component name is tool-specific.

Reviewer: Case and avoid saying that there is a recommendation:
```suggestion
If not specified the names of new components are tool-specific.
```

The following prefixes may be included in the string \lstinline!prefixes!: \lstinline!inner!,
\lstinline!outer!, \lstinline!replaceable!, \lstinline!constant!, \lstinline!parameter!, \lstinline!discrete!.
The default is an empty string.

\begin{nonnormative}
In combination with \lstinline!defaultComponentName! it can be used to make it easy for users to create \lstinline!inner! components matching the \lstinline!outer! declarations; see also example below.
If the prefixes contain \lstinline!inner! or \lstinline!outer! and the default name cannot be used (e.g., since it is already in use) it is recommended to give a diagnostic.
\end{nonnormative}

\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
/*literal*/ constant String missingInnerMessage;
\end{lstlisting}%
\annotationindex{missingInnerMessage}

When an \lstinline!outer! component of the class does not have a corresponding \lstinline!inner!

> component, the literal string message may be used as part of a diagnostic message if specified (together with appropriate context), see \cref{instance-hierarchy-name-lookup-of-inner-declarations}.

Reviewer: Require non-empty and remove line break.

\end{nonnormative}

A class may have the following annotation:

> \begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica, mathescape=true]

Reviewer: Rely on `mathescape` default:
```suggestion
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
```

A simple type or component of a simple type may have:
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]

> /*literal*/ constant Boolean absoluteValue;

Author: ```suggestion
/*literal*/ constant Boolean absoluteValue=true;
```
Will add a bit more a few lines below. Having `true` as default makes sense, as that means that unit offset is used for a variable just having `unit="K"`.

> /*literal*/ constant Boolean absoluteValue=true;

Author: ```suggestion
/*literal*/ constant Boolean absoluteValue = true;
```
Spaces

A simple type or component of a simple type may have:
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]

> /*literal*/ constant Boolean absoluteValue;

Author: There is now a default-value.

If that is not possible the current class can have also have an \lstinline!obsolete! annotation.

A component declaration may have the following annotation:

> \begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica, mathescape=true]

Reviewer: Rely on `mathescape` default:
```suggestion
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
```

\begin{nonnormative}
When converting between units (in the user-interface for plotting and entering parameters), the unit offset must be ignored for a variable defined with annotation \lstinline!absoluteValue = false!.
This annotation is used in the Modelica Standard Library, for example in \lstinline!Modelica.Units.SI! for the type definition \lstinline!TemperatureDifference!.

> For most types there is no unit offset and the annotation is not needed for them.

Author: We could add that "For types with a unit offset it is recommend to have the annotation for clarity." But I believe that should be a separate PR.

A component declaration or a short replaceable class definition may have the following annotation:
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
record Dialog
  /*literal*/ constant String tab = "General";
  /*literal*/ constant String group = "";

>   /*evaluable* / parameter Boolean enable = true;

Reviewer: Typo:
```suggestion
  /*evaluable*/ parameter Boolean enable = true;
```

A class may have the following annotation:
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
/*literal*/ constant String obsolete;
\end{lstlisting}%
\annotationindex{obsolete}

> Only has an effect if specified (and in that case the string should be non-empty).

Reviewer: Stronger:
```suggestion
Only has an effect if specified, and the string must then be non-empty.
```

Besides version information, a top-level class can have additionally the following top-level annotations to specify associated information to the version number:%
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
/*literal*/ constant String versionDate   "UTC date of first version build (in format: YYYY-MM-DD)";
/*literal*/ constant Integer versionBuild "Larger number is a more recent maintenance update";

> /*literal*/ constant String dateModified  "UTC date and time of the latest change to the package

Reviewer: Considering the line breaks we had since before, I would guess that we now exceed the page width.  Perhaps better to reformat with the description string starting on the line below?

\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
record Protection
  $\ldots$

>   /*literal*/ constant String features[:] = fill("", 0) "Required license features";

Reviewer: I think we use the simpler syntax for annotations:
```suggestion
  /*literal*/ constant String features[:] = {} "Required license features";
```

This should probably be described in the notation.

Author: > I think we use the simpler syntax for annotations:
> 
> This should probably be described in the notation.

The `fill("", 0)` was existing, so I don't think that suggestion belongs in this PR.

Additionally I see `{}` as problematic (in general) at least at the moment, since the goal with this PR is to describe the annotations using Modelica syntax and `{}` isn't currently syntactically valid in Modelica - but I think we should discuss that separately and don't have it blocking this PR.

Reviewer: Well, it might belong here if we could agree on defining `{}` as a valid default for annotations.

Author: To me the main problem is that `{}` isn't syntactically valid.

I don't think that the minor convenience it brings for annotations outweigh the disadvantages of having something that isn't syntactically valid Modelica - especially when the entire goal of this PR is to re-use the Modelica syntax for annotations. People should be familiar with `fill("", 0)` by now.

To me how to best handle that is clearly a different topic, and shouldn't block this one.

Reviewer 2: Now that `{}` was removed from the allowed input, I am putting my vote in favor of `fill("",0)`. In addition to the problem with `{}` being syntactically invalid, `fill("",0)` contains information about the expected type: it should be an array of string that is empty by default.

Reviewer: Let's start this over.  Resolving.

In this section annotations within the \lstinline!Protection! annotation are defined to restrict the usage of the encrypted package:
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
record Protection
  /*literal*/ constant Access access;

>   /*literal*/ constant String features[:] = fill("", 0) "Required license features";

Reviewer: Rely on implicit default for arrays:
```suggestion
  /*literal*/ constant String features[:] "Required license features";
```

The license file is standardized.
It is a Modelica package without classes that has a \lstinline!Protection! annotation of the following form which specifies a sequence of target records, which makes it natural to define start/end dates for different sets of targets individually:
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
record Protection
  record Authorization
    /*literal*/ constant String licensor = "" "Optional string to show information about the licensor";
    /*literal*/ constant String libraryKey "Matching the key in the class. Must be encrypted and not visible";
    /*literal*/ constant License license[:] "Definition of the license options and of the access rights";
  end Authorization;

  record License
    /*literal*/ String licensee = "" "Optional string to show information about the licensee";
    /*literal*/ String id[:] "Unique machine identifications, e.g., MAC addresses";

>     /*literal*/ String features[:] = fill("", 0) "Activated library license features";

Reviewer: Rely on default for arrays:
```suggestion
    /*literal*/ String features[:] "Activated library license features";
```

    /*literal*/ String startDate = "" "Optional start date in UTCformat YYYY-MM-DD";
    /*literal*/ String expirationDate = "" "Optional expiration date in UTCformat YYYY-MM-DD";

>     /*literal*/ String operations[:] = fill("", 0) "Library usage conditions";

Reviewer: Rely on defaults for arrays:
```suggestion
    /*literal*/ String operations[:] "Library usage conditions";
```
